My father is Irish and when he was young he took in
a great
social experiment as an experiment. That's what it
was it was that Irish
language the century all the
sudden it was in the schools
and studied it for a very long
time but I was about half.
This was in the one nine hundred thirty S. and forty's. It's in
the
pendants country at the time the
language
which
people
speak the piece. Dating back to
the seventeenth century Irish Catholic spoke Irish the use of the language
was discouraged Irish had been ever
since in the one nine hundred thirty S. just a decade after independence from
the Brits the Irish language was
back in school.
The question would people speak it. That's actually still the question today.
Another question
why
psychological resistance to learning the language because
their poverty anti modern attitudes
anti progress attitude the psychological effort needed to overcome the symbolism.
Today in the podcast Irish language revitalisation the Irish have been at
it longer than
most they were in
Word is made possible in part by the National Endowment for the
Humanities celebrating fifty
years of excellence a bit of history for us Irish is a
Celtic language came
from somewhere in Europe. The Romans came across some of these Celtic languages in
some form when they arrived in what is today. Gemini
Austria Belgium northern Spain and elsewhere. We're talking about the fourth to fifth
century
B.C. we don't know exactly when those languages came first to Britain and then to Ireland but there
are certainly well established before the Christian era.
This is Jim McCloskey Jim was born in Ireland he now teaches at the University
of California at Santa Cruz.
So a lot of the literature additions and story traditions. You can hear it
even today's folk tales have their origins in pre Roman gold pre Roman
Austria and so on.
And by mechanise we don't know fully understand at the point when Christianity came in
around the fourth fifth century A.D. some remarkable coming together
of classical learning and local learning produced a very
standardized literary language what we know called
Irish which made it one of the oldest literary languages in Europe older
than English.
This was a golden age for Irish and it pretty much stayed that way for centuries as
the language evolved from old Irish to middle Irish to modern ours
invasions by the Normans and then the English and over time other
languages French and English established themselves in towns on the coast
port towns like Dublin. But until the English really put their foot
down Irish was
predominant until about sixteen twenty six hundred thirty iron. Is basically
a monolingual country whose only language was Irish I was only really with the expansion of
English a minister of power beyond the pale beyond
Dublin that that situation changes so the crucial moment the crucial initial moment
in the decline the language comes in the first half of the seventeenth century. Not until
then or you mention beyond the pale. I tried that out on a couple of Americans and asked them if
they knew where that expression came from very comes from perhaps right comes from.
You know the pale with an imaginary fence around Dublin that kept the wild Irish
at bay and civilization the English speaking civilization was safe inside the pale
in the capital
city. Yeah. I mean you say the wild Irish was was the
language associated with this sort of wildness that increasingly
from English eyes needed time to
absolute
hearts of wild Irish or civilized English that live had
roof and the trouble for the language was he got caught up in that you might even
say it still caught up in that north of the border in northern Ireland which is still of course part of Britain.
But the decline of
Irish isn't just down to the Brits sure they set it
in motion but later on they got a big helping hand from
a homegrown
group the last steps in the elimination of Irish is a broadly spoken
language they were taken by a cooperative and collaborative effort between
the colonial government in Dublin and the Catholic Church the single two most
powerful institution such shape the life of Ireland in the nineteenth century.
Yes the Catholic Church the very organization
that centuries before. I've been the target of Britain's penal
laws when the Catholic church thereby But over time it came to
an understanding with Island British rulers the church for example
ran the schools in Ireland and here is an echo.
The U.S. and its policies toward Native Americans Irish became
banned in most
school to really remove a language from the community have to take a particular step
you have to convince the speakers of that
language that it's a burden rather than a culturally useful tool.
It's only at that point that they will take the extraordinary step of not speaking their native language to their own
children any language that is
eliminated that's a crucial seven as be taken in a single generation a generation has
to come to believe that their language is such a burden that they will not pass I've
broken on to their own children.
The worst reason to learn English the potato famine of the eight
hundred forty great famine it wiped out one million are rich
people most of them from beyond the pale the West where Irish
was widely spoken another million they fled the country in such a
better
life without being so likely that their children would migrate to
English speaking countries Britain the US Canada places like that it made
sense that they learn English but still Irish
families weren't just acquiring English.
They were turning their backs on
Irish learning English does not entail. Necessarily abandoning the first language.
Most people the world have always been multi-lingual the vast majority human beings are multilingual have always
been
multilingual but that means in turn to persuade parents that they will not they will hide their own language
from their children you have to work with and within the community.
And so you need leaders within the community who will cooperate in the
project. It turned out to be hugely successful before the famine three to
four million people spoke Irish as their first language. A few decades
later fewer than a million dead Irish was falling off a
cliff. Cue the Gaelic revival of the late nineteenth century.
This was a movement to bring back the native language and culture it soon got taken up by
political revolutionaries people who wanted to push the English out of violent and
so the Irish language became the symbol not just of the nation but
of nationhood and independence.
In nine hundred sixteen almost exactly one hundred years ago
Irish revolutionaries staged an uprising in Dublin the Easter Rising it
failed in the short time. Most of the leaders were captured and killed but it soon led to
the end a British rule in all but the six counties that today constitute Northern
Ireland by nine hundred twenty two The Irish were pretty much running their own affairs.
Which brings us back to my dad in a school room learning the recently
liberated language in this newly liberated
land said Dad tell me the words that you know an
Irish. I don't know how to count nine endorsed
three How record share shock talk. As one to nine and also
I remember just a
little sad request on when a category one dollar Mark Marcia Holly. What does
that mean it means please Miss may leave the
room nice but that's it's more than ten years of studying the language.
Some people have fared better with Irish U.C. Santa Cruz is Jim McCloskey For one he grew
up in a city a ways away from the Irish speaking areas greatly shrunken
Irish speaking areas by the time he was at school in the one nine hundred sixty
S. but Jim's father wanted him to speak Irish so we sent him to
those areas for weeks at a time to learn the
language and this year I hated his experience it was uncomfortable it was agricultural I was
a middle class urban child of the
sixty's. But gradually over the years a place in the. Unity and all that
has had sort of cast a spell on me and the time I was seventeen or eighteen.
It became a sort of teenage utopia for me representing a kind of freedom than a kind of
cultural richness.
Because when you actually get into those communities those ideas being communities you find this wealth of.
Cultural resources songs and music and stories and it's
an astonishingly still vibrant
and culturally exciting community to be
even peripherally a part
of what kind of people were you staying with what would be the jobs that they would do
and who would be the other people in the communities who you would
meet. This was part of a larger scheme set up at the government. One of the
few successful strategies they had which was urban kids like me could go to our speaking
areas in the summer. Stay with local families in their farmhouses attend classes during the
day and various you know dances
and musical events in the evening for roughly three weeks every summer and for some people
like me that experience turned them into good second language speakers of
Irish
It was a strange situation because the people we stayed were for sort of the poor you know they were
subsistence farmers or they were agricultural laborers they had virtually nothing.
I remember being twenty
boys from various cities staying in this tiny tiny
farmhouse three room four
months and certain point I began to wonder where the man of the house
Mickey Hanura nobody who is a wonderful storyteller where where he slept and his brother John slept.
I want to notice that they were going out to the barn to the US House and that's where they
slept in the summer to make room for us language learn
and you know the man I stayed with was a very eminent very well known
storyteller.
Only you would tell stories after dinner and this was which
I enjoyed at the time but it was only later when I went to university to study Celtic studies and
archaeology and so on that I came to realise that the stories that he was telling her and
the characters had figured in those stories could be traced all the way back to pre Roman
gods told and retold and retold and perfected over generations
of oral
transmission.
So it was an extraordinary experience to be exposed to this ancient and rich
culture in that
time.
OK so I got to say right now that Jim and everyone else in this part cast that
pretty dedicated to Irish but with the exception of my dad.
Everyone else has made a pretty big effort but they're not in the majority
most Irish people may be proud of the language but they don't speak it except for
a few words. Here's another believer in the language a generation younger than
Jim His name is Ella O'Halloran and he had a huge advantage in picking
up the language.
Both my parents they made a very deliberate decision that we were going to speak Irish in the home.
Illo grew up in the west of Ireland not in an Irish speaking region but very close to
work for him and his sister speaking Irish at home and English at school. It worked
for a while. But then something a bit unexpected started happening.
My sister was was speaking a mix of Irish and English in the
same sentence and nobody could understand what she was
saying so they switch to English at home still there was
hope there was school. It was the early one nine hundred ninety S.. And there was still
those Irish language classes every day just like my dad had did they help.
Not
really the focus of the Irish classes was was not really. Using as
a speaking language it was on grammar. It was on language structure and it was
also on the Irish language culture so we were studying Irish were studying
Irish literature as well rather than studying as a speaking language and I think that's
why a lot of my
generation developed a resentment for the language.
What was going on Irish Cool's couldn't get it together to teach the national language.
I think it was a determination
to not quite indoctrinations but to teach is as much as we could possibly
be taught about Irish culture if there was there was an ideological aspect to this.
What was the ideology. I think it was maybe that kind of one nine hundred thirty S.
arland we will we will do everything ourselves a little bit isolationist.
It doesn't seem as though the curriculum a changed all that much since my dad's days more
than fifty years
before the LS I wish I
hadn't improved at school but something in him also resisted the
resentment that so many others felt after high school he went to college and go away
city which is very close to the Irish speaking region of
Connemara and he discovered that you could speak the language and talk
about contemporary stuff. He started hanging out in Go
ways Irish speaking
club where they had the chiefest once again it's in the city and just sitting in there and listening
to people speak Irish you know it was it was an expectation that you would speak Irish It was
just I had greater exposure to your speakers of my own age and so I grade
a chance to use this in a more natural flowing conversational manner.
OK so you then became fluent.
Not quite fluent. I would say that I had a pretty good use of the language certainly a lot
better than I do now I was surprised by how
much of it was actually kind of stored within me you know how much of it came out
when when I wasn't nervous to. To get where you know in a school
environment you're focused on getting it right not expressing yourself or I So when I lived
in Galway the only requirement was to have a bit of fun and it was it was really there
were expressions that I picked up from people who moved into color from kind of Mara that I
found hilarious.
I know it's almost impossible to translate humor but I would still like to ask
you what was some of those expressions that you found hilarious.
They're all
sexual So Perry my
my housemate who is from Karen in kind of Maher come in and
say Venus I will crack and which is we were
having sex when talking about his night as
or or just hearing had the lads from Connemara would describe when they would
see like a good looking woman on the street how they would describe it like that.
And I'd kind of be very hesitant to even repeat those things because they could be borderline
offensive but it was hearing hearing Ladish banter us qualia as we would say
that made me realize that the language could be a bit more than what I thought it
was ill mention that. Not speaking the languages much these days he lives in Boston
now he's been based in the US on and off the ten years.
One of the first things I did when I moved to Boston was I found an Irish speakers club and they do
exist a good friend of mine from my hometown teaches Irish in Boston.
So I would say that there's even now in Boston there's a
stronger fire speaking community than there was five or six years ago and it's more US
focused and here's something Irish really has going for it the support of
the D.S.P. or the Irish abroad and of course it's especially strong here in
the US what people who call themselves Irish maybe Irish born
like Ala or maybe a generation or two
or five or six removed only
a fraction of them learn Irish but
still and well if you think health
and. I think one of
S.S. Now I don't know what those two people are saying either but they are speaking
Irish. Hello it's mission on and that means.
Hi my name's come on ten year old Connell Baba his father's called
Gault I was born in clientele California. My father also
was born in California and his grandfather though was born in Wyoming or
something like
that Galt came to the language through traditional Irish
music which father and son play together.
OK Yes we're talking about a tiny number of people like Bob the family but it
shows how much goodwill there is here in the U.S. for all things
Irish there's also academic support. There are dozens of places here is
a college's old language club so what have you when you can learn Irish.
At U.C. Santa Cruz where
Jim Acosta is a linguistics professor. What does also a research project.
Focused on Irish pronunciation which if you've ever attempted it.
Well you know that you can use any help that you can get this is where Jay
Padgett comes
in talking it's like this amazing orchestration of different things happening in order
to produce speech and so if you want to study that you have to see
it see it see pronunciation in this case see
how Irish speakers produce consonance Irish consulates are categorized as
either slender or
broad when I said below that slender B. and when I say
boy that's a broad
B. to C. the gymnastics involved in producing these sounds
Jayhawks speakers up to a helmet like head vice. It's kind of creepy.
So this thing looks like something from one of the song movies when we whip it out this is the scariest
moments and I
research the helmet is equipped with a camera. Hey presto. The researchers
get ultrasound. Images of people emitting sounds.
They're working with a linguistics professor in Ireland at University College Dublin her name.
Boy am I glad she introduced herself.
Not that I mean it's challenging for non our speakers at times it takes a little bit
of training you notice if there are signs that you are not used to
pronounce
and the research itself could be invaluable and not just to students and teachers
of ours. It's a snapshot of the language
today we want the days of the week collect to be usable
as a kind of a benchmark really so how's the language
changing how the language is
changing from another
perspective how it should change or maybe
even should know. There's a whole lot of should when it comes to
our Should the language
expand to include the version of Irish for some younger Dublin and speak
people for from the Irish speaking regions. These are people who grew up speaking
English but to a greater or lesser extent have embraced Arash on
their terms it's their own Irish
one that ignores classic pronunciation or certain aspects of the
grammar an Irish that sometimes mixes in some English words
should the language allow for that of keeping the
nation building flame
alive is for
Ireland has suffered so many betrayals over the years
who may be doing the betraying
Now again there are echoes of Native
American languages and their
struggles and this is why there are a language purists in Ireland
some in powerful positions overseeing policy. Don't mess
with the language. It's the subtext of their message.
It defines us as a people. We brought it back after independence in
one hundred twenty two you may not like the way we taught it and dressed it up
in a narrative about what it is to be Irish You may call
the effort
a failure because you didn't remember the words you learnt at
school but it gave you a sense of
being
still living languages change. That's what they do and if they don't.
It's a good indication that dying.
According to the most recent census in two thousand and eleven seventy seven thousand
people in Ireland speak Irish on a daily basis. Not counting students who only
speak at school seventy seven thousand going to disappear
tomorrow. But that same census also found one
hundred nineteen thousand people in Ireland speak polish on a
daily basis.
So what's the way forward for
Irish is in other countries which one might look at this whole effort not in the context of the
the global issue of language loss and the loss of linguistic diversity
went back with Jim McCloskey of U.C. Santa Cruz and in that larger
context in a fundamentally sort of anti nationalist perspective on the
issue. It doesn't matter much but this new language doesn't much resemble
traditional owners at all the fact is it's a new linguistic variety is being used
for interesting creative purposes and interesting community
purposes and it is thereby increasing the store of linguistic and
cultural diversity in the world and if your goal in quote unquote
preserving Irish is to increase the store of linguistic and cultural diversity in the world today.
Then one has to say that this has been the partial success because
that community of second language speakers would not have existed. If that project had not been
initiated in one thousand twenty
two. Paunch we've been
here Charlie me
and Thomas on call where
I'm
still Tamera
monotone the wrist songs like this one sung in Irish with an obvious
youth appeal the video of this song. I'll post it. Dot org
slash language. It features do you lots of them. One of those some
accounts in an Irish speaking
region
on
the last frame of the video has a four word message. I won't even try to
pronounce it. You could translated into English check these out.
Jim McCloskey says it's one of those new phrase spoke of an Irish the type
of new Irish that makes traditional IT.
Well that's it for today. Besides this video there's a bunch of stuff at our website like a photo at
that home it like Lost.
On an ultrasound image it produced of Irish pronunciations that sat P
R I don't org slash language additional reporting this week by
Doug McKnight of K S Z
U public radio station a big thanks to Doug. Also thanks for the really
big response to our name tag series that is the
stories behind place names we've got so many suggestions like what's the story of a
road called Zyzzyx Road. That's in the Mojave Desert in California or why
does Maine have a whole bunch of tells me. Named after countries like Mexico
and Sweden and Peru and Denmark and
others. We started to dig into a few of these questions more answers will come in
future episodes. If you have a name tag story that you'd like us to investigate a question
about a town the name or a street name or a building name any place name
and let us
know of the world was Facebook page or on Twitter at lingo Pod or
drop us a
line. The address is language at P R I don't
or guess the accent of the N.E.H. funding is back. It's coming up again in a
minute let us know if you think you know where the speaker comes from Bonus
points if you can guess the region as well as the
country and how long she's lived in the United States.
My dad gets The Last Word on Irish I asked him was it ultimately
a good thing that he started it all those years.
It was a good thing and it was quite fun but I wasn't scholarly enough really
to appreciate that I don't really feel we did any harm at the time of course
the opposite opinion would be held by me Aberlour said noted this is a terrible waste of
time because you don't need this language and the occasional Irish teacher would say
Who are your aggressors one day that you didn't work out or you know and I actually do I
really would like to know it much better do it I don't know if it
will all
gone
there was in way is made possible in part by the National Endowment for the
Humanities celebrating fifty years of
excellence
found work sound works from
P.R.I..